
# **Short Description of the Contents of each Module**

This document provides a brief overview of the content of each of the six modules delivered throughout the 12-week bootcamps at Tuwaiq Academy, as well as the main themes and topics that will be covered.

## **Course Material and Delivery**

  The students will be given access to the GitHub repository accordingly, as all lectures material, additional slides and coding notebooks will be shared by their instructor. In addition to installing the metis environment, the students will also be required to install Zoom and possess a Google Account. All lectures and additional activities will be recorded on a daily basis on Zoom, in order to provide students with the opportunity to review the sessions at their own time, should they feel that they did not get a full grasp of the concepts explained. However, only the lecturer, their screen and notes on the white board will feature in these recordings; and no video feed of any of the participating students will be recorded. To enable students to interact with their instructors and seek assistance and guidance during their coding tasks, the students will utilize Slack and Google Classroom. If the students necessitate any help from the trainers in the classroom, then the latter will provide it in the class. In the case that this is not achievable for certain students, the latter can obtain online assistance through Zoom breakout sessions. In addition, students will also be afforded the opportunity to book one-to-one sessions with their trainers via appointlet.com. These 1:1 sessions aim at instructors following up on the project progress of students and discuss possible obstacles stumbled upon that are impeding the completion of the projects. The success criteria for the projects will be clearly communicated beforehand to the students, giving the latter ample time and opportunity to receive fruitful and constructive feedback on their projects before the delivery deadline. Finally, all assessments (conceptual and programming) will take place on Hackerrank and Google Quizzes. These will be automatically graded, and the resulting marks will be registered on Google Classroom.

## **Modules Description**
  
### **Module 1: Basic Python & Mathematics (Weeks 1 and 2):**

  Module 1 offers an introduction to the Data Science landscape, core topics, and its numerous applications in various fields. This module delineates the distinction between the fields of Artificial Intelligence, Machine Learning, Statistics and Analytics, and also presents the skills required and the job roles that can be assumed by a Data Scientist, the different modelling approaches that can be adopted, and the major branches of Machine Learning and the problems the latter aim to solve. Module 1 also serves as an introduction to programming using the Python programming language, where students will be exposed to the fundamentals of Python, its different functionalities, as well as basic and advanced data structures and types. This module also allows the students to familiarize themselves with 3 Python libraries, themselves pertinent to Data Scientist, namely: Numpy (for numerical computation), Pandas (for data manipulation) and MatplotLib (for visualization). In addition, the students are introduced to Git and Github, two powerful tools for maintaining, versioning and sharing source code. In addition, this module equips the students with a strong mathematical and statistical background for grasping later concepts in other modules, such as linear algebra, differential calculus, probability and statistical inference (both Frequentist and Bayesian).

### **Module 2: Exploratory Data Analysis (Weeks 3 and 4)**

 Module 2 deals with Exploratory Data Analysis (EDA), a necessary stepping stone for any Data Science analysis. It first explains the different types of database storage that are used, and teaches the fundamentals of SQL for data extraction, wrangling and analysis. Students will also learn how to perform data cleaning tasks, and the various tricks that can be resorted to for this purpose. Advanced programming concepts are also presented, such as computational complexity and object-oriented programming. Furthermore, the different summary statistics and plots frequently employed in EDA are also covered, as well as their interpretation and the context in which they are adequate. Finally, some guidelines on data visualization and presentation are also offered.

### **Module 3: Regression (Weeks 5 and 6)**

 Module 3 exposes the students to web scraping for automating data extraction from web pages. It explains the basics of web scraping, as well as introduces HTML, CSS and regular expressions. In addition, it overviews some typical issues encountered and methods to solve them. Module 3 also covers regression problems, a major class of problems in Supervised Learning. The students are first exposed to Linear Regression (Simple and Multiple), its mathematical and statistical properties, as well as the assumptions underpinning it and how to verify them. More advanced topics are then presented, such as feature transformation, model evaluation, cross-validation and the Bias-Variance trade-off. An alternative optimization approach to estimating the regression model, is then detailed, the stochastic gradient descent, which is employed in different Machine Learning tasks. Finally, regularization techniques (Ridge Regression, LASSO) for high-dimensional data and time series analysis for time-indexed data are explained.

### **Module 4: Classification (Weeks 7 and 8)**

  Module 4 covers classification in the context of Supervised Learning, going through several classification models in detail, which consist of: k-Nearest Neighbors, Logistic Regression, Naive Bayes, Support Vector Machines and Decision Trees. The students will be introduced to classification metrics and statistical model evaluation for this type of problem, and the differences with assessing models for regression problems will be highlighted. Furthermore, the topic of class imbalance in datasets will be introduced, emphasizing the pitfalls in assessing models developed for this type of problems, and offering different sampling techniques to remedy these caveats. Ensembling methods for improving the classification performance of models are then presented, explaining to the students key techniques such as Bagging and Boosting, and showing them advanced ensemble models such as Random Forests, Boosted Trees and XGBoost.

### **Module 5: Unsupervised Learning & NLP (Weeks 9 and 10)**

  Module 5 elaborates on a major paradigm in Data Science and Machine Learning: Unsupervised Learning. This module compares the differences with Supervised Learning tasks, and elaborates on various types of problems that draw on Unsupervised Learning. Students are exposed to the curse of dimensionality, and how unsupervised techniques such as Principal Component Analysis and Singular Value Decomposition can be applied for dimension reduction. Clustering techniques are also explained, alongside their evaluation metrics. Various clustering techniques and their underlying algorithms are detailed, mainly: k-Means, Hierarchical agglomerative clustering, DBSCAN, Mean shift clustering, spectral clustering and Affinity propagation. Recommender Systems, and the different methods of filtering are also presented. Finally, Natural Language Processing (NLP), which is used to process text, audio and speech, is covered in great detail. This includes methods for handling and preprocessing text, similarity measures, text generation, topic modeling and some of the techniques utilized such as Latent Dirilecht Allocation, and presents different libraries and advanced tools that can be employed for the purpose of NLP.

### **Module 6: Deep Learning (Weeks 11 and 12)**

  Module 6 addresses Deep Learning, a revolutionary and powerful subset of Machine Learning tailored for problems with large amounts of data, which has received a great amount of coverage in the past few years in the Data Science community. The students are first introduced to Neural Networks, which mimic the structure of the human brain. This module takes a dive into the various intricacies of Neural Networks, such as their different architectures, activation functions, model training and weights optimization. An overview of Deep Learning is then provided, explaining the statistical and computational differences with standard Neural Network architectures, and emphasizing the performance improvements that can be reaped from these models, as well as listing its many successful applications in different fields. Transfer Learning, which builds on Neural Networks trained on one dataset and repurposed on another, is explained, showcasing its benefit in many Data Science applications and elaborating on its principles and tenets. Two major types of Deep Learning Neural Networks are discussed in great detail: Convolutional Neural Networks and Recurrent Neural Networks, which have main applications in image and text processing, respectively. 



